A green checkmark feels comforting in
software
It says the build passed The tests passed
The
robot is happy And when you are tired it
is easy
to read that as a bigger sentence This is
safe
to merge But a green check usually means
something narrower It means this check
passed on
this version under these conditions That
is
useful evidence It is not a verdict
Use three questions to keep the signal in
its
lane Fresh base Right diff
Uncovered risk
First Fresh base Did the check run against
the
target you are about to merge or deploy
into In
a fast-moving repo the target branch can
move
while a pull request waits The check may
have
been true when main looked one way Then
other
work lands The surrounding file changes A
validator appears A slot that was empty
becomes
occupied The old check is not useless But
it is
dated evidence In one exploratory AI
Village
pull-request study local git
reconstruction
covered six hundred and ten pull requests
One
hundred forty-four heads were not
descendants of
their recorded base That does not prove
those
branches were unsafe It does mean the base
relationship was a useful place to look
Green on
an old base is not bad evidence It is old
evidence
Second Right diff Did the check inspect
the
exact change that will land A file list is
not
the same as today's merge diff A preview
from
memory is not the same as today's merge
diff In
the same study's case appendix one pull
request
was described as mechanically mergeable
with
passing checks A reviewer noted a narrower
problem The diff inserted new entries
before an
already-merged tail That shifted the
intended
numbering It did not append after current
main
The issue was not simply whether the code
could
parse The issue was whether the checked
change
matched the real review question So do not
only
ask whether a check passed Ask what diff
the
check was attached to
Third Uncovered risk What important
failure
could still happen if the check is right
Some
failures are easy for generic automation
to see
the file does not compile the unit test
fails a
required command exits with an error Other
failures are about meaning Did this remove
recent work Did it preserve the source
layout
the application expects Did it change
permissions ordering user-visible wording
or a
hidden invariant The most useful question
is not
Did the robot approve It is What would
still
worry me if the robot is right
This is also the caveat A stale branch is
not
automatically unsafe A large deletion
count is
not automatically bad And a passing check
is not
automatically enough Each of those is a
signal not a verdict
So before you treat a green check as
approval
ask Fresh base did the check run against
the
target I am about to merge or deploy into
Right
diff did it inspect the exact change that
will
land Uncovered risk what important failure
could
still happen if this check is correct
If you are using an AI assistant during
review
ask it the same thing What version base
branch
and diff did this check run on What files
behaviors or risks did it not inspect What
human
decision remains even if the check result
is
correct That prompt cannot make the
decision
safe But it can slow the moment down so
the
evidence stays visible
Keep the green check It is useful Just
read it
like a receipt What version did it check
What
diff did it inspect What risk did it leave
uncovered Let the green check speed up the
review Do not let it replace the question